The mind is a tricky thing. It can lead us to believe that we can confidently
sing "Bohemian Rhapsody" at karaoke even though we haven't heard the song in
years, or that one terrible review on Yelp is reason enough not to go to a
4-star rated restaurant.


These thinking errors are what people in the psychology community call
cognitive biases. And that's the focus of a new book out this month, Thinking
101: How to Reason Better to Live Better, by Yale psychology professor
Woo-kyoung Ahn. In the book, Ahn highlights some of the most pernicious cognitive
slip-ups we make  and how biases can cloud our judgment and affect the
people around us.


Researchers suspect that many of these biases are evolutionary, says Ahn.
During times of scarcity, our ancestors had to make quick judgments in order to
survive among predators or thrive in a difficult environment. But in a time of
abundance, she adds, these quick judgments don't always do us good.


However, we can do our best to try to correct these thinking traps, says Ahn,
which she teaches her students how to do in her popular undergraduate course at
Yale. In general, she says, the key is to pause before making assumptions 
and be aware of our tendencies for different kinds of bias.





**** The bias: We overestimate our abilities ****


This is known in the field of psychology as an "illusion of fluency," which
describes our tendency to be overconfident in our abilities without sufficient
evidence. This can lead us, for example, to bungle career-altering
presentations because of inadequate preparation, or dramatically underestimate
the time it takes to complete projects.


In her class at Yale, Ahn uses an experiment to illustrate this phenomenon with
her students. She shows them a dance clip from the song "Boy with Luv" by the
K-pop group BTS. After watching six seconds of the easiest choreography moves
over and over again, she invites the students who believe they have the dance
down to do it themselves. One after another stumbles.


"People can have overconfidence about what they can accomplish by watching
other people do it so fluently," Ahn says. When the pros dance in a way that
looks effortless, they think they can do it effortlessly too.


How to counteract it:You can correct this bias, she says, by doing what the
Yale students did: Try it out yourself. It will quickly put any feelings of
overconfidence to rest.


You can also fight this tendency by over-preparing and considering potential
obstacles beforehand, says Ahn. For example, if you're working on a home
remodeling project for the first time and have no idea how long it will take,
don't try to guess. Talk to friends who went through a recent remodel or
consult with a few contractors to understand how long the project might take
and what problems may arise. The more information you have, the better and more
accurately you can assess a situation.






**** The bias: We tend to fixate on the negative ****


The concept of "negativity bias" illustrates our propensity to weigh negative
events a lot more heavily than an equal amount of positive events. It explains
why a friend's unenthusiastic review of an Oscar-nominated movie, for example,
might spur you to watch something else. Or why you might be less inclined to
hire a potential employee after hearing one negative thing about them, despite
positive referrals.


Negativity bias can be dangerous because it can lead us to make the wrong
choices. It can hold us back from making a decision about something, say a big
purchase like a house, or even a political candidate, out of fear there was
once a negative event associated with an otherwise good choice.


How to counteract it:When making a choice, play up the positive attributes of
your options, says Ahn. Marketers use this tactic all the time. For example,
instead of saying that ground beef contains 11% fat, they label it is as 89%
lean. These are both true and accurate descriptions of the same product, but
flipping the framing of it can make it a more attractive choice for buyers
concerned with fat intake.






**** The bias: We cherry-pick data to fit our worldview ****


Ahn considers "confirmation bias"  the tendency to seek out or interpret
information to support what we already believe  the worst bias of all.
That's because of its potential to lead us to miss an entire range of
possibilities for ourselves and others.


Ahn and Matthew Lebowitz, a psychology professor at Columbia University,
conducted an experiment in 2017 to illustrate the pitfalls of this bias. They
gathered a group of participants and told some of them they had a genetic
predisposition to depression  even though they did not. The results of that
group's depression self-assessments showed much higher levels of depression
than people in a control group who were told they did not have the
predisposition.


Because of confirmation bias, the participants who were told they had a genetic
risk of depression retrieved "only the evidence that fit with that hypothesis,"
says Ahn. And in doing so, they managed to convince themselves that they were
actually depressed. The study shows that if we believe something is a fact,
even if it isn't, our mind can find information to support those views.


Now imagine this bias at work on a societal level. Ahn says it can lead to
under- or over-representation in say, leadership in politics, business and
other industries, which can feed gender or racial inequality.


She shares an example. Let's say you're a male scientist and you're looking to
hire other scientists to join your company. Because you see that the most
prominent scientists in your field are currently men, you've convinced yourself
that the next generation of great scientists will also be men. This colors your
decision-making in hiring  and so you fill the positions with men.


That choice will continue to have a ripple effect, says Ahn. For others looking
at the new hires, it might perpetuate the idea that "only men can be great
scientists  and that's exactly how prejudice and stereotypes get formed in
society."


How to counteract it: Allow yourself to examine all possible explanations before
you make a judgment. For example, if an actor landed a part but her parents
were also in the entertainment business, many of us might attribute her
employment to nepotism. Since we've seen many examples of parents giving their
kids a leg up in business or politics, another example of a child benefiting
from their parents' success would fit that theory.


But could it also be true that she gave the best audition? By looking at the
issue from many different viewpoints  not just your own  it challenges
your confirmation bias. And you might realize that perhaps there is another
side to the story.



